docs: add 8.14 release notes (#5973)
snapcore/snapcraft: docs/release-notes/snapcraft-8-14.rst

Snapcraft 8.14 brings the following features, integrations, and improvements.

Ruby plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~

A new :ref:`craft_parts_ruby_plugin` is available for building Ruby apps for core22 and
newer snaps.

Improved project file schema
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

IDEs use Snapcraft’s schema to validate and auto-complete ``snapcraft.yaml`` files. The
schema has been reworked to improve validation and properly support base-specific keys.

The schema is now automatically generated, so it will stay up-to-date as
new keys are added.

Minor features
--------------

Snapcraft 8.14 brings the following minor changes.

Chisel support for unstable releases
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Chisel slices can now be used for :ref:`stage-packages <PartSpec.stage_packages>` for
core26 snaps and snaps using ``build-base: devel``.

Collision detection for ``organize``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Snapcraft now checks for collisions when organizing with the :ref:`organize
<PartSpec.organize_files>` key. Collisions will now raise an error.

Destructive mode warning
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Users are now warned when they run Snapcraft in destructive mode as a non-root user,

> which can cause potentially unexpected behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running Snapcraft in destructive mode with a non-root user can cause unexpected
behavior. Snapcraft now emits a warning if it's run like this.
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5973/commits/19f0de1fd1f1abb8dc1e7b58b9b85d008e56492d

Git improvements

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Git source improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5973/commits/19f0de1fd1f1abb8dc1e7b58b9b85d008e56492d

A number of improvements have been made for parts using the ``git``
:ref:`source-type <PartSpec.source_type>`.

- Shallow clones of git sources are now possible when using :ref:`source-commit
  <PartSpec.source_commit>` with :ref:`source-depth <PartSpec.source_depth>`.
- When cloning Git repos, detached HEAD warnings are now suppressed.
- Running ``git describe --dirty`` in an override script of a clean repository no longer

>   falsely reports the repository as dirty.

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5973/commits/19f0de1fd1f1abb8dc1e7b58b9b85d008e56492d

JLink options

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New JLink plugin keys
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5973/commits/19f0de1fd1f1abb8dc1e7b58b9b85d008e56492d

The :ref:`craft_parts_jlink_plugin` has new options, ``jlink-multi-release`` and
``jlink-modules``.

KDE neon 6 theming
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :ref:`KDE neon 6 <reference-kde-neon-extensions>` extension now supports LXQt and
Kvantum theming.

``success-exit-status`` key
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Daemons can use the new :ref:`success-exit-status <App.success_exit_status>` key to
control exit status handling.

uv plugin bytecode
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The :ref:`craft_parts_uv_plugin` now compiles bytecode. Use ``UV_COMPILE_BYTECODE=0``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :ref:`craft_parts_uv_plugin` now compiles bytecode. Set ``UV_COMPILE_BYTECODE=0``
in the environment
```

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/commit/19f0de1fd1f1abb8dc1e7b58b9b85d008e56492d

.. _release-8.14:

Snapcraft 8.14 release notes
============================

03 Feburary 2026

Learn about the new features, changes, and fixes introduced in Snapcraft 8.14.

Requirements and compatibility
------------------------------
See :ref:`reference-system-requirements` for information on the minimum hardware and
installed software.

What's new
----------

Snapcraft 8.14 brings the following features, integrations, and improvements.

Ruby plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~

> A new :ref:`craft_parts_ruby_plugin` is available for building Ruby apps for core22 and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :ref:`craft_parts_ruby_plugin` is available for building Ruby apps for core22 and
```

We never had one to begin with. :)

Author: Ah, when writing this I was thinking of the Ruby plugin for core and core18.

> newer snaps.

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5973/commits/19f0de1fd1f1abb8dc1e7b58b9b85d008e56492d

JLink options

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Author: I took your second opinion on this: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5973/commits/19f0de1fd1f1abb8dc1e7b58b9b85d008e56492d

The :ref:`craft_parts_jlink_plugin` has new options, ``jlink-multi-release`` and

> ``jlink-modules``.

Reviewer: It's not guaranteed that the reader will follow the link. If possible, I'd prefer if we give a brief explanation of what they do here.

Benefits:

- Immediately provides a way to decide if the feature is for them.
- Potentially motivates them to use it.
- Preserves the history of what the features did at time of release.

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5973/commits/19f0de1fd1f1abb8dc1e7b58b9b85d008e56492d

``success-exit-status`` key
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Daemons can use the new :ref:`success-exit-status <App.success_exit_status>` key to
control exit status handling.

KDE neon 6 theming
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :ref:`KDE neon 6 <reference-kde-neon-extensions>` extension now supports LXQt and

> Kvantum theming.

Reviewer: Does the user have to do something to get the theming, like with the content interface?

Minor features
--------------

Snapcraft 8.14 brings the following minor changes.

Chisel support for unstable releases
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Chisel slices can now be used for :ref:`stage-packages <PartSpec.stage_packages>` for

> core26 snaps and snaps using ``build-base: devel``.

Author: Good point. I rephrased the title and the body to focus on the important thing - core26 support. I don't need to mention `build-base: devel` or "upcoming releases".

> core26 snaps and snaps using ``build-base: devel``.

Author: https://github.com/canonical/snapcraft/pull/5973/commits/19f0de1fd1f1abb8dc1e7b58b9b85d008e56492d

Daemons can use the new :ref:`success-exit-status <snapcraft-yaml-success-exit-status>`
key to control exit status handling.

KDE neon 6 theming
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :ref:`KDE neon 6 <reference-kde-neon-extensions>` extension now supports LXQt and
Kvantum theming.

Minor features
--------------

Snapcraft 8.14 brings the following minor changes.

Chisel support for unstable releases
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Chisel slices can now be used for :ref:`stage-packages <snapcraft-yaml-stage-packages>`
for core26 snaps and snaps using ``build-base: devel``.

Collision detection for ``organize``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Snapcraft now checks for collisions when organizing with the :ref:`organize
<snapcraft-yaml-organize>` key. Collisions will now raise an error.

Destructive mode warning
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Users are now warned when they run Snapcraft in destructive mode as a non-root user,
which can cause potentially unexpected behavior.

Git improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A number of improvements have been made for parts using the ``git``
:ref:`source-type <snapcraft-yaml-source-type>`.

- Shallow clones of git sources are now possible when using

>   :ref:`source-commit <snapcraft-yaml-source-commit>` with :ref:`source-depth

Reviewer 2: Will these still be valid refs once Kitbash is updated to 1.0.0? cc @jahn-junior

Ruby plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~

The new :ref:`craft_parts_ruby_plugin` is available for packaging Ruby apps with
core22 and higher.

Improved project file schema
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

IDEs read the Snapcraft schema to validate and auto-complete ``snapcraft.yaml`` files.

The schema is reworked to improve validation and support base-specific keys. It's also
automatically generated with each new release, so it will stay up-to-date as new keys
are added in new Snapcraft versions.

Minor features
--------------

Snapcraft 8.14 brings the following minor changes.

Chisel support for core26
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Chisel slices can now be used for :ref:`stage-packages <PartSpec.stage_packages>` for
core26 snaps.

Collision detection for ``organize``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Snapcraft now checks for collisions when organizing with the :ref:`organize
<PartSpec.organize_files>` key. Collisions will now raise an error.

Destructive mode warning
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Running Snapcraft in destructive mode with a non-root user can cause unexpected
behavior. Snapcraft now emits a warning if it's run like this.

Git source improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> A number of improvements have been made for parts using the ``git``

Reviewer: `Git` would be more correct, yes. Alternatively, `source-type: git` works, but I wouldn't wrap that in a link.
